feat: Add Prefect Server and Worker Helm Tutorial (#17362)
PrefectHQ/prefect: docs/v3/tutorials/server-and-worker.mdx

---
title: Deploy a Prefect Server and Worker with Helm
description: Deploy a Prefect OSS Server and Worker with Helm.
---

In this tutorial, you'll learn how to deploy an [OSS Server](https://github.com/PrefectHQ/prefect-helm/tree/main/charts/prefect-server) and [Worker](https://github.com/PrefectHQ/prefect-helm/tree/main/charts/prefect-worker) with Helm.

## Prerequisites

- A Kubernetes cluster
- Helm CLI installed

## Getting Started

### Before You Begin

<Note>
**Disclaimers:**
- Configuring ingress / publicly exposing Prefect from the cluster is business dependent and not covered in this tutorial.
- For details on Ingress configuration, consult the [Kubernetes documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress/).
</Note>

### Set Up Your Environment

> Create a new namespace to work from (all commands in this quick-start will use this namespace):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new namespace to work in (all commands in this quick-start will use this namespace):
```

   ```bash
   kubectl create namespace prefect-server
   kubectl config set-context --current --namespace=prefect-server
   ```

## Deploy Prefect Server with Helm

1. Add the Prefect Helm repository:
   ```bash
   helm repo add prefect https://prefecthq.github.io/prefect-helm
   ```

> 2. For a basic deployment with default values, using the latest Prefect version and no auth:

Author: Sounds good, I can do that

   ```

5. Example `server-values.yaml` file for this tutorial:
   ```yaml
   server:
     basicAuth:
       enabled: true
       # Must pre-exist if existingSecret is used; use authString otherwise
       existingSecret: "server-auth-secret"  
     autoscaling:
       enabled: true
     livenessProbe:
       enabled: true
     readinessProbe:
       enabled: true
   ```

6. Install Prefect Server with custom values:
   ```bash
   helm install prefect-server prefect/prefect-server -f server-values.yaml
   ```

   Expected output:
   ```
   NAME: prefect-server
   LAST DEPLOYED: Tue Mar  4 09:08:07 2025
   NAMESPACE: prefect-server
   STATUS: deployed
   REVISION: 1
   TEST SUITE: None
   NOTES:
   Run the following command to port-forward the UI to your localhost:
   $ kubectl --namespace prefect-server port-forward svc/prefect-server 4200:4200

   Visit http://localhost:4200 to use Prefect!
   ```

7. Access the Prefect UI:
   ```bash
   kubectl --namespace prefect-server port-forward svc/prefect-server 4200:4200
   ```

8. Navigate to `localhost:4200` and login with `admin:password123`.

## Deploy a Prefect Worker

> To connect a worker to your Prefect server in the same cluster:

Reviewer: same thing down here -- i'd have two headings - 1 with auth and 1 without

       enabled: true
   ```

6. Install Prefect Server with custom values:
   ```bash
   helm install prefect-server prefect/prefect-server -f server-values.yaml
   ```

   Expected output:
   ```
   NAME: prefect-server
   LAST DEPLOYED: Tue Mar  4 09:08:07 2025
   NAMESPACE: prefect-server
   STATUS: deployed
   REVISION: 1
   TEST SUITE: None
   NOTES:
   Run the following command to port-forward the UI to your localhost:
   $ kubectl --namespace prefect-server port-forward svc/prefect-server 4200:4200

   Visit http://localhost:4200 to use Prefect!
   ```

7. Access the Prefect UI:
   ```bash
   kubectl --namespace prefect-server port-forward svc/prefect-server 4200:4200
   ```

8. Navigate to `localhost:4200` and login with `admin:password123`

## Deploy a Prefect Worker

To connect a worker to your Prefect server in the same cluster:

1. Create a secret for the API basic auth:
   ```bash
   kubectl create secret generic worker-auth-secret --from-literal auth-string='admin:password123'
   ```

2. Create a `worker-values.yaml` file for this tutorial:
   ```yaml
   worker:
     apiConfig: selfHostedServer
     config:
       workPool: kube-test
     selfHostedServerApiConfig:

>        apiUrl: http://prefect-server.prefect-server.svc.cluster.local:4200/api
>        # apiUrl = <service>.<namespace> if in same cluster, or FQDN if external

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
       # <service>.<namespace> if in same cluster, or FQDN if external
       apiUrl: http://prefect-server.prefect-server.svc.cluster.local:4200/api
```

     basicAuth:
       enabled: true
       existingSecret: worker-auth-secret
   ```

3. Install the Prefect Worker:
   ```bash
   helm install prefect-worker prefect/prefect-worker -f worker-values.yaml
   ```

   Expected output:
   ```
   Release "prefect-worker" has been upgraded. Happy Helming!
   NAME: prefect-worker
   LAST DEPLOYED: Tue Mar  4 11:26:21 2025
   NAMESPACE: prefect-server
   STATUS: deployed
   REVISION: 1
   TEST SUITE: None
   NOTES:
   ```

## Cleanup

To uninstall Prefect Server and Worker:

```bash

> helm uninstall prefect-server
> helm uninstall prefect-worker

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
helm uninstall prefect-worker
helm uninstall prefect-server
```

What do you think of deleting them in reverse order? Probably doesn't really matter, but respects the dependencies and less likely to leave the worker in a confused state.

## Prerequisites

- A Kubernetes cluster
- Helm CLI installed

## Getting Started

### Before You Begin

<Note>
**Disclaimers:**
- Configuring ingress / publicly exposing Prefect from the cluster is business dependent and not covered in this tutorial.
- For details on Ingress configuration, consult the [Kubernetes documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress/).
</Note>

### Set Up Your Environment

Create a new namespace to work in (all commands in this quick-start will use this namespace):
   ```bash
   kubectl create namespace prefect
   kubectl config set-context --current --namespace=prefect
   ```

## Deploy Prefect Server with Helm

Add the Prefect Helm repository:
   ```bash
   helm repo add prefect https://prefecthq.github.io/prefect-helm
   ```

<Expandable title="Default Values / No Auth">
For a basic deployment with default values, using the latest Prefect version and no auth:
   ```bash
   helm install prefect-server prefect/prefect-server
   ```
</Expandable>

<Expandable title="Custom Values / With Auth">

> For a customized deployment, create a values.yaml file for Prefect Server (see [values.yaml template](https://github.com/PrefectHQ/prefect-helm/blob/main/charts/prefect-server/values.yaml)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For a customized deployment, create a `values.yaml` file for Prefect Server (see [values.yaml template](https://github.com/PrefectHQ/prefect-helm/blob/main/charts/prefect-server/values.yaml)).
```

Create a secret for the API basic auth:

>    ```bash
>    kubectl create secret generic server-auth-secret --from-literal auth-string='admin:password123'
>    ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
```bash
kubectl create secret generic server-auth-secret --from-literal auth-string='admin:password123'
```
````

Example `server-values.yaml` file for this tutorial:

>    ```yaml
>    server:
>      basicAuth:
>        enabled: true
>        # Must pre-exist if existingSecret is used; use authString otherwise
>        existingSecret: "server-auth-secret"  
>      autoscaling:
>        enabled: true
>      livenessProbe:
>        enabled: true
>      readinessProbe:
>        enabled: true
>    ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
```yaml
server:
  basicAuth:
    enabled: true
    # Must pre-exist if existingSecret is used; use authString otherwise
    existingSecret: "server-auth-secret"  
  autoscaling:
    enabled: true
  livenessProbe:
    enabled: true
  readinessProbe:
    enabled: true
```
````

Install Prefect Server:

>    ```bash
>    helm install prefect-server prefect/prefect-server -f server-values.yaml
>    ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
```bash
helm install prefect-server prefect/prefect-server -f server-values.yaml
```
````

</Expandable>

>    Expected output:
>    ```
>    NAME: prefect-server
>    LAST DEPLOYED: Tue Mar  4 09:08:07 2025
>    NAMESPACE: prefect
>    STATUS: deployed
>    REVISION: 1
>    TEST SUITE: None
>    NOTES:
>    Run the following command to port-forward the UI to your localhost:
>    $ kubectl --namespace prefect-server port-forward svc/prefect-server 4200:4200
> 
>    Visit http://localhost:4200 to use Prefect!
>    ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
Expected output:
```
NAME: prefect-server
LAST DEPLOYED: Tue Mar  4 09:08:07 2025
NAMESPACE: prefect
STATUS: deployed
REVISION: 1
TEST SUITE: None
NOTES:
Run the following command to port-forward the UI to your localhost:
$ kubectl --namespace prefect-server port-forward svc/prefect-server 4200:4200

Visit http://localhost:4200 to use Prefect!
```
````

Access the Prefect UI:

>    ```bash
>    kubectl --namespace prefect-server port-forward svc/prefect-server 4200:4200
>    ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
```bash
kubectl --namespace prefect-server port-forward svc/prefect-server 4200:4200
```
````

> Navigate to `localhost:4200` and login with `admin:password123`.

Reviewer 3: For the verb form, sign in is better than login. https://developers.google.com/style/word-list?hl=en#login

```suggestion
Open `localhost:4200` in your browser and sign in with `admin:password123`.
```

## Deploy a Prefect Worker

To connect a worker to your Prefect server in the same cluster:

> <Expandable title="Default Values / No Auth">

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<Expandable title="Default values (no auth)">
```

Create a `worker-values.yaml` file for this tutorial:
```

>    worker:
>      apiConfig: selfHostedServer
>      config:
>        workPool: kube-test
>      selfHostedServerApiConfig:
>        # <service>.<namespace> if in same cluster, or FQDN if external
>        apiUrl: http://prefect-server.prefect-server.svc.cluster.local:4200/api

Reviewer 3: If this isn't an addendum to an existing file, I don't think `worker:` should be indented.

Also, let's use the standard formatting for placeholders. https://developers.google.com/style/placeholders?hl=en

```suggestion
worker:
  apiConfig: selfHostedServer
  config:
    workPool: kube-test
  selfHostedServerApiConfig:
    # SERVICE.NAMESPACE if in same cluster, or FQDN if external
    apiUrl: http://prefect-server.prefect-server.svc.cluster.local:4200/api
```

```

Install the Prefect Worker:

>    ```bash
>    helm install prefect-worker prefect/prefect-worker -f worker-values.yaml
>    ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
```bash
helm install prefect-worker prefect/prefect-worker -f worker-values.yaml
```
````

</Expandable>

> <Expandable title="Custom Values / With Auth">

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<Expandable title="Custom values (with auth)">
```

Create a secret for the API basic auth:

>    ```bash
>    kubectl create secret generic worker-auth-secret --from-literal auth-string='admin:password123'
>    ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
```bash
kubectl create secret generic worker-auth-secret --from-literal auth-string='admin:password123'
```
````

Create a `worker-values.yaml` file for this tutorial:

>    ```yaml
>    worker:
>      apiConfig: selfHostedServer
>      config:
>        workPool: kube-test
>      selfHostedServerApiConfig:
>        # <service>.<namespace> if in same cluster, or FQDN if external
>        apiUrl: http://prefect-server.prefect-server.svc.cluster.local:4200/api
>      basicAuth:
>        enabled: true
>        existingSecret: worker-auth-secret
>    ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
```yaml
worker:
  apiConfig: selfHostedServer
  config:
    workPool: kube-test
  selfHostedServerApiConfig:
    # SERVICE.NAMESPACE if in same cluster, or FQDN if external
    apiUrl: http://prefect-server.prefect-server.svc.cluster.local:4200/api
  basicAuth:
    enabled: true
    existingSecret: worker-auth-secret
```
````

Install the Prefect Worker:

>    ```bash
>    helm install prefect-worker prefect/prefect-worker -f worker-values.yaml
>    ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
```bash
helm install prefect-worker prefect/prefect-worker -f worker-values.yaml
```
````

</Expandable>

>    Expected output:
>    ```
>    Release "prefect-worker" has been upgraded. Happy Helming!
>    NAME: prefect-worker
>    LAST DEPLOYED: Tue Mar  4 11:26:21 2025
>    NAMESPACE: prefect
>    STATUS: deployed
>    REVISION: 1
>    TEST SUITE: None
>    NOTES:
>    ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
Expected output:
```
Release "prefect-worker" has been upgraded. Happy Helming!
NAME: prefect-worker
LAST DEPLOYED: Tue Mar  4 11:26:21 2025
NAMESPACE: prefect
STATUS: deployed
REVISION: 1
TEST SUITE: None
NOTES:
```
````

## Cleanup

> To uninstall Prefect Server and Worker:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To uninstall the Prefect Server and Worker:
```

```bash
helm uninstall prefect-worker
helm uninstall prefect-server
```

## Troubleshooting

<Expandable title="Container creation error">
If you see this error:
```
Error from server (BadRequest): container "prefect-server" in pod "prefect-server-7c87b7f7cf-sgqj2" is waiting to start: CreateContainerConfigError
```

> Check events with `kubectl events`. Confirm that the authString is correct.

Reviewer 3: These two sentences have a strong coupling, and are short, so I think a conjunction makes sense.

```suggestion
Run `kubectl events` and confirm that the `authString` is correct.
```

</Expandable>

<Expandable title="Authentication error">
If you see this error:
```
prefect.exceptions.PrefectHTTPStatusError: Client error '401 Unauthorized' for url 'http://prefect-server.prefect-server.svc.cluster.local:4200/api/work_pools/kube-test'
Response: {'exception_message': 'Unauthorized'}
For more information check: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/401
An exception occurred.
```

> Ensure basicAuth is configured in the worker-values.yaml file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Ensure `basicAuth` is configured in the `worker-values.yaml` file.
```

</Expandable>

<Expandable title="Connection error">
If you see this error:
```
File "/usr/local/lib/python3.11/site-packages/httpcore/_backends/anyio.py", line 113, in connect_tcp
  with map_exceptions(exc_map):
File "/usr/local/lib/python3.11/contextlib.py", line 158, in __exit__
  self.gen.throw(typ, value, traceback)
File "/usr/local/lib/python3.11/site-packages/httpcore/_exceptions.py", line 14, in map_exceptions
  raise to_exc(exc) from exc
httpcore.ConnectError: [Errno -2] Name or service not known
```

> Ensure the PREFECT_API_URL is properly templated.
> 
> This can be confirmed via:

Reviewer 3: Avoid via: https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#via

Also, what is `PREFECT_API_URL`? An environment variable?

```suggestion
Ensure the `PREFECT_API_URL` environment variable is properly templated by running the following command:
```

```bash
helm template prefect-worker prefect/prefect-worker -f worker-values.yaml
```

> If you are following this quick-start and the worker is in the same cluster and namespace, the format should be:
> ```
> http://prefect-server.prefect-server.svc.cluster.local:4200/api
> ```

Reviewer 3: You should assume that the reader is following the tutorial. If you need to, you can use a callout box to highlight alternative scenarios.

````suggestion
The URL format should look like the following:

```
http://prefect-server.prefect-server.svc.cluster.local:4200/api
```

<Note>
If the worker is not in the same cluster and namespace, the precise format will vary.
</Note>
````
